docs: add new Stylelint ADR (#693)
CleverCloud/clever-components: docs/adr/adr-0023-adding-stylelint.md

---
kind: '📌 Docs/Architecture Decision Records'
---
# ADR 0023: Adding Stylelint

🗓️ 2023-XX-YY · ✍️ Mathieu Degand

## The context

Since the beginning of this component library we didn't have a dedicated tool to format our CSS and enforce some rules. 
Yet, we still had a custom ESLint plugin to sort our CSS declarations but that was pretty much it as referenced in [ADR 11](link_adr). 

> However, in 2020 we found that Stylelint was able to handle CSS in template literals and that we might be able to use it to replace our ESLint sort rule and enforce some CSS rules to enforce code style and coherence across our library code base.

Reviewer: Double usage of "enforce" in the same sentence :wink:
The sentence is a bit long.

Thus, we decided to give it a try in 2022 when reworking and apdating our tools for the component library.

> <!--- TODO: maybe explain in a few words what is stylelint ---> 

Reviewer 2: Agree! A one-liner will be sufficient though. :wink:

While Standard does what recommended lacks (rules and format) we have decided to not use it as default but use a custom one and extends it which allows us to override some rules we thought didn't match with our code style.

#### AirBnb

After trying the one provided by Stylelint we decided to check some that were available on the web to see if there were any popular one and we saw that the one from Airbnb was quite popular or used. 
However, after checking it out we found that it was not using the latest version of Stylelint and it would take too much effort to make it work with the new version and downgrading Stylelint was not something we wanted to make so we decided to not chose it.

#### Custom

Finally we tried to do a custom config by ourselves which is the solution we have chosen and is detailed in the `Solution` section below.

### Orders

#### Alphabetical

As the name suggest we first considered to just order our properties alphabetically. While it was a good idea we thought that we might have an order that has a bit more logic without being too complex so we didn't chose this solution.

#### Idiomatic

> This orders the CSS properties with first the ones that do positioninghten the display and box model and the rest ordered alphabetically. 

Reviewer: positioninghten => `positioning then`

    "no-missing-end-of-source-newline": null,
    "no-eol-whitespace": null,
    "property-no-vendor-prefix": null,
    "selector-class-pattern": [
      "^([a-z][a-z0-9]*)((-{1,2}|_{1,2})[a-z0-9]+)*$",
      {
        "message": "Expected class selector to be either kebab-case, kebab--case or snake__case"
      }
    ],
    "selector-id-pattern": [
      "^([a-z][a-z0-9]*)((-{1,2}|_{1,2})[a-z0-9]+)*$",
      {
        "message": "Expected id selector to be either kebab-case, kebab--case or snake__case"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

While we won't dive in the configuration deeper you can find the rules on the Stylelint website. 
What we have done here is basically adding or overriding existing rules on the `Standard` configuration to best match our needs.

In order to run and check our styles on our component we created two commands in our `package.json` file who are : 
* `stylelint` which runs stylelint and checks for errors 
* `stylelint:fix` which runs stylelint and checks for errors and autofix the ones who are autofixable
* `stylelint:ci` which runs stylelint and checks for errors and formats the ouput for our GitHub actions CI.

> The benifits of Stylelint are that we now have a coherent style across our component library code base and use the same format everywhere.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The benefits of Stylelint are that we now have a coherent style across our component library code base and use the same format everywhere.
```

> It also allowed us to get rid of the custom ESLint sort plugin which is done by Stylelint directly from now on. 

Reviewer: Perfect :+1:

## Problems encoutered

> While we are satisfied with our current configuration we encountered some problemes in the proces with some rules.

Reviewer: problemes => problems

Reviewer: proces => process

---
kind: '📌 Docs/Architecture Decision Records'
---
# ADR 0023: Adding Stylelint

🗓️ 2023-XX-YY · ✍️ Mathieu Degand

## The context

Since the beginning of this component library, we didn't have a dedicated tool to format our CSS and enforce some rules. 
Yet, we still had a custom ESLint plugin to sort our CSS declarations but that was pretty much it as referenced in [ADR 11](https://www.clever-cloud.com/doc/clever-components/?path=%2Fstory%2F%F0%9F%93%8C-docs-architecture-decision-records-adr-0011-sorting-css-declarations--page). 

However, in 2020 we found that Stylelint was able to handle CSS in template literals. 

Thus, we decided to give it a try in 2022 when reworking and adapting our tools for the component library.

## Considered solutions

The first thing we had to consider was the config that we would use.

> The config would allow us to enforce some style rules and uniformize our CSS code format.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The config would allow us to enforce some style rules and standardize our CSS code formatting.
```

> For this purpose, we did some tests, with some of the base ones first which were *Recommended* and *Standard*. Then we checked the *Airbnb* one, and finally, we tried a custom one.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For this purpose, we did some tests, relying on the base configs first (*Recommended* and *Standard*). Then we checked the *Airbnb* one, and finally, we tried to build our own config.
```

### Config

#### Recommended

> *Recommended* is a premade configuration available by default with Stylelint, while you can choose to use it you can still make your config and don't rely on it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
*Recommended* is a premade configuration available by default with Stylelint.
 You may choose to use it or you may build your own config.
```

The main purpose of the recommended configuration is to avoid common CSS code errors but it won't do anything else.
That means that it won't enforce any convention, format, or specific rules.

While it could have served as a base for our configuration we have decided not to go with it as it doesn't provide any base code format and some base rules.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

#### Standard

The *Standard* configuration is provided by Stylelint too but as it is not present by default you must install it and add it as a dependency.

> It uses the *Recommended* one as its base but it does enforce here some conventions and format.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The *Standard* configuration is based on the *Recommended* one but it improves on it by enforcing some conventions and formatting.
```

> While Standard does what recommended lacks (rules and format) we have decided to not use it as default but use a custom one and extend it which allows us to override some rules we thought didn't match with our code style.

Reviewer 4: I find the sentence a bit long.

```suggestion
While *Standard* does what *Recommended* lacks (rules and format), we have decided to not use it as default.
Instead, we chose to have a custom configuration based on the *Standard* which allows us to override some rules we thought didn't match with our code style.
```

#### Airbnb

After trying the one provided by Stylelint we decided to check some that were available on the web to see if there were any popular ones and we saw that the one from Airbnb was quite popular or used. 
However, after checking it out we found that it was not using the latest version of Stylelint.
 Indeed, it would take too much effort to make it work with the new version. Also, downgrading Stylelint was not something we wanted to make so we decided to not choose it.

#### Custom

> Finally, we tried to do a custom config by ourselves which is the solution we have chosen and is detailed in the `Solution` section below.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Finally, we tried to create a custom config by ourselves which is the solution we have chosen and is detailed in the `Solution` section below.
```

### Orders

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

#### Alphabetical

As the name suggests we first considered just ordering our properties alphabetically. While it was a good idea we thought that we might have an order that has a bit more logic without being too complex so we didn't choose this solution.

#### Idiomatic

> This orders the CSS properties with first the ones that do positioning then the display and box model and the rest ordered alphabetically. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This orders the CSS properties with:

1. the ones related to positioning,
2. the display and box model rules,
3. the other rules, ordered alphabetically. 

```

> You can find more info [here](https://github.com/necolas/idiomatic-css#declaration-order)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can find more info in the [Idiomatic CSS repository documentation](https://github.com/necolas/idiomatic-css#declaration-order)
```
(let's try to provide explicit links for blind users :wink:)

    "comment-empty-line-before": null,
    "rule-empty-line-before": "always-multi-line",
    "selector-pseudo-element-colon-notation": "double",
    "selector-pseudo-class-parentheses-space-inside": "never",
    "media-feature-range-operator-space-before": "always",
    "media-feature-range-operator-space-after": "always",
    "media-feature-parentheses-space-inside": "never",
    "media-feature-name-no-vendor-prefix": true,
    "media-feature-colon-space-before": "never",
    "media-feature-colon-space-after": "never",
    "no-descending-specificity": null,
    "no-empty-first-line": null,
    "declaration-block-no-redundant-longhand-properties": null,
    "no-missing-end-of-source-newline": null,
    "no-eol-whitespace": null,
    "property-no-vendor-prefix": null,
    "selector-class-pattern": [
      "^([a-z][a-z0-9]*)((-{1,2}|_{1,2})[a-z0-9]+)*$",
      {
        "message": "Expected class selector to be either kebab-case, kebab--case or snake__case"
      }
    ],
    "selector-id-pattern": [
      "^([a-z][a-z0-9]*)((-{1,2}|_{1,2})[a-z0-9]+)*$",
      {
        "message": "Expected id selector to be either kebab-case, kebab--case or snake__case"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

> While we won't dive into the configuration deeper you can find the rules on the Stylelint website. 

Reviewer 3: we could provide a link to https://stylelint.io/user-guide/rules

What we have done here is adding or overriding existing rules on the `Standard` configuration to best match our needs.

> To run and check our styles on our component we created two commands in our `package.json` file who are : 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To run and check our styles on our component we created two commands in our `package.json` file: 
```

> * `stylelint` which runs Stylelint and checks for errors 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* `stylelint` which runs Stylelint and checks for errors,
```

> * `stylelint:fix` which runs Stylelint and checks for errors and auto-fixes the ones that are auto fixable

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* `stylelint:fix` which runs Stylelint and checks for errors and auto-fixes the ones that are auto fixable,
```

* `stylelint:ci` which runs Stylelint and checks for errors and formats the output for our GitHub actions CI.

> The benefits of Stylelint are that we now have a coherent style across our component library code base and use the same format everywhere.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The benefits of Stylelint are that we now have a coherent style across our component library code base and use the same formatting everywhere.
```

It also allowed us to get rid of the custom ESLint sort plugin which is done by Stylelint directly from now on. 

## Problems encountered

While we are satisfied with our current configuration we encountered some problems in the process with some rules.

### The whitespace rule

First, we had some problems with the whitespace rule (no-eol-whitespace-rule). The purpose of this rule is not to have whitespace after a line ending (e.g: semicolon or empty lines). The problem with this is that the processor we use targets only the CSS inside template literals which means the backtick wasn't included.
This leads the code going from this: 
```javascript
static get styles () {
    return [
      skeletonStyles,
      // language=CSS
      css`
        :host {
          display: block;
        }
      `,
    ];
```
to this:
```javascript
static get styles () {
    return [
      skeletonStyles,
      // language=CSS
      css`
        :host {
          display: block;
        }
`,
    ];
```

> As you can see the ending backtick of the template literal isn't formatted correctly because of this rule as the rule is triggered as an empty line with whitespaces in it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As you can see, the closing backtick of the template literal isn't formatted correctly.
This is because Stylelint considers it as an empty line containing whitespaces.
```
(I tried to change the sentence but I'm not sure I understand it :sweat_smile: If my attempt is bad and you are stuck, we can discuss it and come up with something together :wink:)

As a consequence for now we have deactivated this rule. 

### Selector name case

> Another problem was the case on our selectors, indeed by default the `Standard` configuration that we extend wants the selectors to be written as `kebab-case` whereas in our components we also used `kebab--case` and `snake__case`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We encountered another problem on the the case policy applied on CSS selectors.
Indeed, the `Standard` configuration that we extend forces the CSS selectors to be written in `kebab-case` whereas in our components we also used `kebab--case` and `snake__case`.
```

> To resolve this problem we decided to override these rules (id and class selectors) to match our needs which lead us to have the rule as follows: 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To resolve this problem we decided to override these rules (id and class selectors) to match our needs which led us to the following rule: 
```

```json
{
   "selector-class-pattern": [
      "^([a-z][a-z0-9]*)((-{1,2}|_{1,2})[a-z0-9]+)*$",
      {
        "message": "Expected class selector to be either kebab-case, kebab--case or snake__case"
      }
    ],
    "selector-id-pattern": [
      "^([a-z][a-z0-9]*)((-{1,2}|_{1,2})[a-z0-9]+)*$",
      {
        "message": "Expected id selector to be either kebab-case, kebab--case or snake__case"
      }
    ]
}
```

> To make it work we just modified the regular expression that is directly provided on the Stylelint website to match our needs and provided a custom message to know precisely what's happening otherwise we would just have had a generic message.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To make it work, we just modified the regular expression that is directly provided on the Stylelint website to match our needs.
We also provided a custom message to know precisely what's happening, otherwise we would just have had a generic message.
```

### Duplicate selectors on atoms

> On our `atoms` components like for example `cc-button` or `cc-select` while making our own we still use the default HTML element and tweak it. This makes us have the same base selector twice. One for resetting purposes and another one to style it. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
On our `atoms` components like for example `cc-button` or `cc-select` while making our own we still use the default HTML element and tweak it.
This makes us have the same base selector twice: One for resetting purposes and another one to style it. 
```

Reviewer 4: Sorry, but I don't understand the first sentence.

> On our `atoms` components like for example `cc-button` or `cc-select` while making our own we still use the default HTML element and tweak it. This makes us have the same base selector twice. One for resetting purposes and another one to style it. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In our `atoms` components like for example `cc-button` or `cc-select`, we wrap the native HTML elements (`<button>` and `<select>`) and we tweak them.
This means we use the same base selector twice. First to reset the native styles and then to style the element as we want. 
```
I think we may need an example here :wink:

> The problem is that we have a Stylelint rule that doesn't allow duplicate selectors. 

Reviewer 4: Can you tell which rule?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The problem is that this is not allowed by the `no-duplicate-selectors` rule which is part of the custom config we use. 
```

> To resolve this issue and still keep the rule we have decided to put an ignore comment on these selectors.

Reviewer 4: Can you say we like this rule and want it to be applied? But still, we like the way we `reset default` and then `apply our style` in two different CSS selectors.

### No-descending-specificity

> [No-descending-specificity](https://stylelint.io/user-guide/rules/no-descending-specificity/) is a rule that forces the order of the selectors within their specificity.

Reviewer 4: I like having the link to the official Stylint description. Can you apply that everywhere in this ADR?

Also, you could choose to have those links using `code block` (if it's feasible with markdown syntax).

---
kind: '📌 Docs/Architecture Decision Records'
---
# ADR 0023: Adding Stylelint

🗓️ 2023-XX-YY · ✍️ Mathieu Degand

## The context

Since the beginning of this component library, we've never had a dedicated tool to format our CSS and enforce some rules. 
We only still had a custom ESLint plugin to sort our CSS declarations but that was pretty much it as referenced in [ADR 11](https://www.clever-cloud.com/doc/clever-components/?path=%2Fstory%2F%F0%9F%93%8C-docs-architecture-decision-records-adr-0011-sorting-css-declarations--page). 

However, in 2020 we found out that Stylelint was able to handle CSS in template literals. 

Thus, we decided to give it a try in 2022 when reworking and adapting our tools for the component library.

## Considered solutions

The first thing we had to consider was the config that we would use.

The config would allow us to enforce some style rules and standardize our CSS code formatting.

> For this purpose, we did some tests, relying on the base configs first (*Recommended* and *Standard*). Then we checked the *Airbnb* one, and finally, we tried to build our own config.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For this purpose, we did some tests, relying on the base configs first (*Recommended* and *Standard*). Then we checked the *Airbnb* one, and finally, we tried to create our own config.
```

### Config

#### Recommended

*Recommended* is a premade configuration available by default with Stylelint.

> You may choose it or build your own config.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You may choose it or create your own config.
```

    "media-feature-parentheses-space-inside": "never",
    "media-feature-name-no-vendor-prefix": true,
    "media-feature-colon-space-before": "never",
    "media-feature-colon-space-after": "never",
    "no-descending-specificity": null,
    "no-empty-first-line": null,
    "declaration-block-no-redundant-longhand-properties": null,
    "no-missing-end-of-source-newline": null,
    "no-eol-whitespace": null,
    "property-no-vendor-prefix": null,
    "selector-class-pattern": [
      "^([a-z][a-z0-9]*)((-{1,2}|_{1,2})[a-z0-9]+)*$",
      {
        "message": "Expected class selector to be either kebab-case, kebab--case or snake__case"
      }
    ],
    "selector-id-pattern": [
      "^([a-z][a-z0-9]*)((-{1,2}|_{1,2})[a-z0-9]+)*$",
      {
        "message": "Expected id selector to be either kebab-case, kebab--case or snake__case"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

While we won't dive into the configuration deeper, you can find a description of each rule on [the Stylelint website](https://stylelint.io/user-guide/rules). 
What we have done here is adding or overriding existing rules on the `Standard` configuration to best match our needs.

> To run and check our styles on our component we created three commands in our `package.json`: 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To run and check our styles on our component we created three commands in our `package.json`: 

```

## The context

Since the beginning of this component library, we've never had a dedicated tool to format our CSS and enforce some rules. 

> We only still had a custom ESLint plugin to sort our CSS declarations but that was pretty much it as referenced in [ADR 11](https://www.clever-cloud.com/doc/clever-components/?path=%2Fstory%2F%F0%9F%93%8C-docs-architecture-decision-records-adr-0011-sorting-css-declarations--page). 

Reviewer 4: We only still had => We only had
